docs/Playbook-Variables.md, before:

# Playbook Variables Overview

You can set many variables on the command line when running a playbook.

For example, to specify a Gaia version for all the hosts in the play:
```
ansible-playbook node.yml -i examples/inventory-local.yml --extra-vars "chain_version=v7.0.2"
```

- Default values and less commonly used variables can be found in the defaults [main.yml file](/roles/gaia/defaults/main.yml).
- Update the [ansible_vars template](/roles/gaia/templates/ansible_vars.json.j2) to modify additional variables in the gaia config files.

## `node` role

### Target

| Variable              | Description                                               | Example Value |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| `target`              | Target server IP/domain (for single node inventory files) | `example.com` |
| `go_version`          | Golang version to install                                 | `"1.18.1"`    |
| `enable_swap`         | Enable/disable swap                                       | `false`       |
| `swap_size`           | Swap file size in MB (8 GB default)                       | `8192`        |
| `chain_use_ssl_proxy` | Enable SSL proxy for chain endpoints using Nginx*         | `false`       |
| `chain_api_host`      | Set the subdomain for REST API (e.g. `rest.testnet.com`)* | `rest`        |
| `chain_rpc_host`      | Set the subdomain for RPC (e.g. `rpc.testnet.com`)*       | `rpc`         |
| `chain_grpc_host`     | Set the subdomain for GRPC (e.g. `grpc.testnet.com`)*     | `grpc`        |
| `chain_p2p_host`      | Set the subdomain for P2P (e.g. `p2p.testnet.com`)*       | `p2p`         |
| `reboot`              | Reboot the machine after all tasks are done when `true`** | `false`       |

*Configure DNS before provisioning.  
**Recommended for initial deployment: this makes sure all services start up and pending system updates are applied.

### Chain Binary Installation
| Variable               | Description                                                                     | Example Value                                                                      |
|------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `node_user`            | User account to install the chain binary in                                     | `gaia`                                                                             |
| `node_user_home`       | Path to the user account home                                                   | `/home/gaia`                                                                       |
| `chain_home`           | Path to chain home folder home                                                  | `/home/gaia/.gaia`                                                                 |
| `chain_home_clear`     | Clear the `chain_home` folder before install when `true`                        | `false`                                                                            |
| `node_unsafe_reset`    | Clear the chain database before install when `true`                             | `true`                                                                             |
| `chain_registry`       | Define `chain_version`, `chain_id` and `genesis_url` using the chain registry   | `https://registry.ping.pub/testnets/theta/chain.json`                              |
| `chain_version`        | Chain repo tag, commit, or branch to check out and compile                      | `v6.0.4`                                                                           |
| `chain_repository`     | URL for chain repo                                                              | `https://github.com/cosmos/gaia.git`                                               |
| `chain_binary_release` | URL of the binary to install                                                    | `https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases/download/v7.0.2/gaiad-v7.0.2-linux-amd64` |
| `chain_binary_source`  | Build the binary from source if set to `build`, download it if set to `release` | `build`                                                                            |
| `node_service_name`    | Chain service name when `use_cosmovisor` is `false`                             | `gaiad`                                                                            |
| `chain_bin`            | Full path for binary                                                            | `/home/gaia/go/bin/gaiad`                                                          |
| `chain_start`          | Starts the chain service at the end of the play                                 | `false`                                                                            |
| `chain_id`             | Chain ID                                                                        | `my-testnet`                                                                       |
| `addrbook_url`         | URL to download the addrbook.json file from                                     | `"https://quicksync.io/addrbook.cosmos.json"`                                      |
| `addrbook_file`        | File path to the addrbook.json file to use                                      | `"addresses.json"`                                                                 |

### Chain Configuration: `genesis.json`

| Variable                 | Description                                                                               | Example Value                                                            |
|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `genesis_url`            | URL to download the gzipped genesis file from                                             | `"https://github.com/cosmos/testnets/raw/master/public/genesis.json.gz"` |
| `genesis_file`           | File path to the genesis file***                                                          | `"examples/genesis-three-node.json"`                                     |
| `chain_voting_period`    | Voting period for gov proposals                                                           | `60s`                                                                    |
| `chain_gov_testing`      | Set minimum deposit to `1`<br> and voting period to <br>`chain_voting_period` when `true` | `false`                                                                  |
| `chain_denom`            | Set denom to replace `stake` with                                                         | `uatom`                                                                  |
| `chain_create_validator` | Create a validator when starting from fresh state                                         | `true`                                                                   |
| `chain_gentx_validator`  | Tokens validator will self-delegate at genesis                                            | `"1000000uatom"`                                                         |
| `chain_validator_coins`  | Funds assigned to validator through genesis                                               | `"11000000uatom"`                                                        |
| `node_keyring`           | Keyring for the validator keypair                                                         | `test`                                                                   |
| `chain_airdrop`          | Airdrop tokens to accounts list when `true`                                               | `false`                                                                  |
| `chain_airdrop_coins`    | Amount to airdrop to specified accounts                                                   | `"10000uatom"`                                                           |
| `chain_airdrop_accounts`      | List of accounts to airdrop tokens to | `[address-1,address-2,address-3]`

***The file will not be copied if there already is an existing file with the same length.  

### Chain Configuration: `config.toml`

| Variable                 | Example Value                                                                       |
|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `fast_sync`              | `true`                                                                              |
| `rpc_port`               | `26657`                                                                             |
| `p2p_port`               | `26656`                                                                             |
| `p2p_seeds`              | `"node-id@http://seed-1.testnet.com:26656,node-id@http://seed-2.testnet.com:26656"` |
| `p2p_persistent_peers`   | `"node-id@http://p2p-1.testnet.com:26656,node-id@http://p2p-2.testnet.com:26656`"   |
| `p2p_allow_duplicate_ip` | `true`                                                                              |
| `statesync_enabled`      | `true`                                                                              |
| `statesync_rpc_servers`  | `"http://rpc.sentry-1.testnet.com:26657,http://rpc.sentry-2.testnet.com"`           |

### Chain Configuration: `app.toml`

| Variable             | Example Value  |
|----------------------|----------------|
| `minimum_gas_prices` | `"0.001uatom"` |
| `api_enabled`        | `true`         |
| `api_port`           | `1317`         |
| `grpc_enabled`       | `true`         |
| `grpc_port`          | `9090`         |
| `grpc_web_enabled`   | `true`         |
| `grpc_web_port`      | `9091`         |

### Chain Configuration: `client.toml`

| Variable                 | Example Value |
|--------------------------|---------------|
| `client_keyring_backend` | `test`        |
| `client_broadcast_mode`  | `block`       |

### Cosmovisor

| Variable                  | Description                                                            | Example Value |
|---------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| `use_cosmovisor`          | Use cosmovisor service when `true`, standalone binary one when `false` | `true`        |
| `cosmovisor_skip_backup`  | Skip Cosmovisor backups                                                | `true`        |
| `cosmovisor_service_name` | Chain service name when `use_cosmovisor` is set to `true`              | `cv-gaia`     |

### Monitoring and Alerting

| Variable                | Description                               | Example Value                                           |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| `monitoring_prometheus` | Configure Prometheus / Grafana monitoring | `false`                                                 |
| `monitoring_panic`      | Configure PANIC monitoring                | `false`                                                 |
| `panic_ssh_url`         | User and address for PANIC server         | `root@monitor.polypore.xyz`                             |
| `panic_config_file`     | Path on PANIC server                      | `/home/panic/panic_cosmos/config/user_config_nodes.ini` |
| `panic_is_validator`    | Set host as a validator for PANIC         | `no`                                                    |

## `faucet` role

| Variable              | Description                                          | Example Value  |
|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| `faucet_enabled`      | Create faucet account and install REST server for it | `true`         |
| `faucet_version`      | Cosmos REST faucet version to install                | `v0.2.1`       |
| `faucet_service_name` | Service name for faucet REST server                  | `token-faucet` |
| `faucet_port`         | Port for the faucet REST server to listen on         | `8000`         |


## `bigdipper` role

| Variable                   | Description                                                      | Example Value                      |
|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| `chain_id`                 |                                                                  | `theta-testnet-001`                |
| `bdjuno_version`           | A `bdjuno` branch that matches the tracked chain                 | `chains/cosmos/testnet`            |
| `bdjuno_rpc_address`       | The RPC address `bdjuno` will collect block data from            | `http://archive.testnet.com:26657` |
| `bdjuno_grpc_address`      | The gRPC address `bdjuno` will collect block data from           | `http://archive.testnet.com:9090`  |
| `bdjuno_fast_sync`         | Blocks close to genesis time will not be parsed if set to `true` | `false`                            |
| `bdui_chain`               | Specifies whether the chain is mainnet or testnet                | `testnet`                          |
| `bigdipper_genesis_time`   | The time of the chain's genesis in UTC, RFC3339 format           | `2022-01-12T00:52:40`              |
| `bigdipper_genesis_height` | The height of the chain at genesis                               | `9034670`                          |
| `bigdipper_use_tls_proxy`  | Enable TLS                                                       | `true`                             |
| `letsencrypt_email`        | A valid email address must be entered when TLS is enabled        |                                    |
| `hasura_admin_secret`      | A password to protect the Hasura service                         |                                    |
| `hasura_host`              | Subdomain for Hasura service                                     | `"hasura."`                        |
| `rpc_host`                 | Subdomain for RPC service                                        | `"rpc."`                           |
| `bdui_host`                | Subdomain for Big Dipper UI                                      | `"explorer."`                      |
| `bdui_icon`                | URL for the chain icon                                           |                                    |
| `bdui_logo`                | URL for the splash logo                                          |                                    |


## `hermes` role

| Variable                   | Description                           | Example Value |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------|
| `hermes_version`           | Hermes repo release                   | `v1.0.0`      |
| `hermes_relayer_keys`      | Set to `true` if using key files      | `true`        |
| `hermes_relayer_mnemonics` | Set to `true` if using mnemonic files | `false`       |
| `hermes_order`             | Channel ordering                      | `unordered`   |


## `consensus-monitor` role

| Variable                    | Description                                                    | Example Value                   |
|-----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| `consensus_monitor_version` | `cosmos-consensus-monitor` version to use                      | `v1.0.0`                        |
| `consensus_api_node_url`    | Node API endpoint                                              | `http://node.testnet.com:26657` |
| `consensus_rpc_node_url`    | Node RPC endpoint                                              | `http://node.testnet.com:1317`  |
| `consensus_ws_node_url`     | Port for the Websockets server                                 | `9002`                          |
| `consensus_ui_node_url`     | Port for the web UI server                                     | `8000`                          |
| `consensus_host`            | Subdomain to prefix the inventory hostname, requires DNS setup | `consensus.`                    |

Commit message:

Option to restore delegator account

docs/Playbook-Variables.md, after:

# Playbook Variables Overview

You can set many variables on the command line when running a playbook.

For example, to specify a Gaia version for all the hosts in the play:
```
ansible-playbook node.yml -i examples/inventory-local.yml --extra-vars "chain_version=v7.0.2"
```

- Default values and less commonly used variables can be found in the defaults [main.yml file](/roles/gaia/defaults/main.yml).
- Update the [ansible_vars template](/roles/gaia/templates/ansible_vars.json.j2) to modify additional variables in the gaia config files.

## `node` role

### Target

| Variable              | Description                                               | Example Value |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| `target`              | Target server IP/domain (for single node inventory files) | `example.com` |
| `go_version`          | Golang version to install                                 | `"1.18.1"`    |
| `enable_swap`         | Enable/disable swap                                       | `false`       |
| `swap_size`           | Swap file size in MB (8 GB default)                       | `8192`        |
| `chain_use_ssl_proxy` | Enable SSL proxy for chain endpoints using Nginx*         | `false`       |
| `chain_api_host`      | Set the subdomain for REST API (e.g. `rest.testnet.com`)* | `rest`        |
| `chain_rpc_host`      | Set the subdomain for RPC (e.g. `rpc.testnet.com`)*       | `rpc`         |
| `chain_grpc_host`     | Set the subdomain for GRPC (e.g. `grpc.testnet.com`)*     | `grpc`        |
| `chain_p2p_host`      | Set the subdomain for P2P (e.g. `p2p.testnet.com`)*       | `p2p`         |
| `reboot`              | Reboot the machine after all tasks are done when `true`** | `false`       |

*Configure DNS before provisioning.  
**Recommended for initial deployment: this makes sure all services start up and pending system updates are applied.

### Chain Binary Installation
| Variable               | Description                                                                     | Example Value                                                                      |
|------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `node_user`            | User account to install the chain binary in                                     | `gaia`                                                                             |
| `node_user_home`       | Path to the user account home                                                   | `/home/gaia`                                                                       |
| `chain_home`           | Path to chain home folder home                                                  | `/home/gaia/.gaia`                                                                 |
| `chain_home_clear`     | Clear the `chain_home` folder before install when `true`                        | `false`                                                                            |
| `node_unsafe_reset`    | Clear the chain database before install when `true`                             | `true`                                                                             |
| `chain_registry`       | Define `chain_version`, `chain_id` and `genesis_url` using the chain registry   | `https://registry.ping.pub/testnets/theta/chain.json`                              |
| `chain_version`        | Chain repo tag, commit, or branch to check out and compile                      | `v6.0.4`                                                                           |
| `chain_repository`     | URL for chain repo                                                              | `https://github.com/cosmos/gaia.git`                                               |
| `chain_binary_release` | URL of the binary to install                                                    | `https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/releases/download/v7.0.2/gaiad-v7.0.2-linux-amd64` |
| `chain_binary_source`  | Build the binary from source if set to `build`, download it if set to `release` | `build`                                                                            |
| `node_service_name`    | Chain service name when `use_cosmovisor` is `false`                             | `gaiad`                                                                            |
| `chain_bin`            | Full path for binary                                                            | `/home/gaia/go/bin/gaiad`                                                          |
| `chain_start`          | Starts the chain service at the end of the play                                 | `false`                                                                            |
| `chain_id`             | Chain ID                                                                        | `my-testnet`                                                                       |
| `addrbook_url`         | URL to download the addrbook.json file from                                     | `"https://quicksync.io/addrbook.cosmos.json"`                                      |
| `addrbook_file`        | File path to the addrbook.json file to use                                      | `"addresses.json"`                                                                 |

### Chain Configuration: `genesis.json`

| Variable                  | Description                                                                               | Example Value                                                            |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `genesis_url`             | URL to download the gzipped genesis file from                                             | `"https://github.com/cosmos/testnets/raw/master/public/genesis.json.gz"` |
| `genesis_file`            | File path to the genesis file***                                                          | `"examples/genesis-three-node.json"`                                     |
| `chain_voting_period`     | Voting period for gov proposals                                                           | `60s`                                                                    |
| `chain_gov_testing`       | Set minimum deposit to `1`<br> and voting period to <br>`chain_voting_period` when `true` | `false`                                                                  |
| `chain_denom`             | Set denom to replace `stake` with                                                         | `uatom`                                                                  |
| `chain_create_validator`  | Create a validator when starting from fresh state                                         | `true`                                                                   |
| `chain_gentx_validator`   | Tokens validator will self-delegate at genesis                                            | `"1000000uatom"`                                                         |
| `chain_validator_coins`   | Funds assigned to validator through genesis                                               | `"11000000uatom"`                                                        |
| `chain_restore_delegator` | Recovers an account and adds it to genesis when `true`****                                | `false`                                                                  |
| `delegator_account_coins` | Funds assigned to restored account through genesis                                        | `"1000000000"`                                                           |
| `node_keyring`            | Keyring for the validator keypair                                                         | `test`                                                                   |
| `chain_airdrop`           | Airdrop tokens to accounts list when `true`                                               | `false`                                                                  |
| `chain_airdrop_coins`     | Amount to airdrop to specified accounts                                                   | `"10000uatom"`                                                           |
| `chain_airdrop_accounts`      | List of accounts to airdrop tokens to | `[address-1,address-2,address-3]`

***The file will not be copied if there already is an existing file with the same length.  
****The mnemonic for this account must be set using the `delegator_account_mnemonic` variable.

### Chain Configuration: `config.toml`

| Variable                 | Example Value                                                                       |
|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `fast_sync`              | `true`                                                                              |
| `rpc_port`               | `26657`                                                                             |
| `p2p_port`               | `26656`                                                                             |
| `p2p_seeds`              | `"node-id@http://seed-1.testnet.com:26656,node-id@http://seed-2.testnet.com:26656"` |
| `p2p_persistent_peers`   | `"node-id@http://p2p-1.testnet.com:26656,node-id@http://p2p-2.testnet.com:26656`"   |
| `p2p_allow_duplicate_ip` | `true`                                                                              |
| `statesync_enabled`      | `true`                                                                              |
| `statesync_rpc_servers`  | `"http://rpc.sentry-1.testnet.com:26657,http://rpc.sentry-2.testnet.com"`           |

### Chain Configuration: `app.toml`

| Variable             | Example Value  |
|----------------------|----------------|
| `minimum_gas_prices` | `"0.001uatom"` |
| `api_enabled`        | `true`         |
| `api_port`           | `1317`         |
| `grpc_enabled`       | `true`         |
| `grpc_port`          | `9090`         |
| `grpc_web_enabled`   | `true`         |
| `grpc_web_port`      | `9091`         |

### Chain Configuration: `client.toml`

| Variable                 | Example Value |
|--------------------------|---------------|
| `client_keyring_backend` | `test`        |
| `client_broadcast_mode`  | `block`       |

### Cosmovisor

| Variable                  | Description                                                            | Example Value |
|---------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| `use_cosmovisor`          | Use cosmovisor service when `true`, standalone binary one when `false` | `true`        |
| `cosmovisor_skip_backup`  | Skip Cosmovisor backups                                                | `true`        |
| `cosmovisor_service_name` | Chain service name when `use_cosmovisor` is set to `true`              | `cv-gaia`     |

### Monitoring and Alerting

| Variable                | Description                               | Example Value                                           |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| `monitoring_prometheus` | Configure Prometheus / Grafana monitoring | `false`                                                 |
| `monitoring_panic`      | Configure PANIC monitoring                | `false`                                                 |
| `panic_ssh_url`         | User and address for PANIC server         | `root@monitor.polypore.xyz`                             |
| `panic_config_file`     | Path on PANIC server                      | `/home/panic/panic_cosmos/config/user_config_nodes.ini` |
| `panic_is_validator`    | Set host as a validator for PANIC         | `no`                                                    |

## `faucet` role

| Variable              | Description                                          | Example Value  |
|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| `faucet_enabled`      | Create faucet account and install REST server for it | `true`         |
| `faucet_version`      | Cosmos REST faucet version to install                | `v0.2.1`       |
| `faucet_service_name` | Service name for faucet REST server                  | `token-faucet` |
| `faucet_port`         | Port for the faucet REST server to listen on         | `8000`         |


## `bigdipper` role

| Variable                   | Description                                                      | Example Value                      |
|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| `chain_id`                 |                                                                  | `theta-testnet-001`                |
| `bdjuno_version`           | A `bdjuno` branch that matches the tracked chain                 | `chains/cosmos/testnet`            |
| `bdjuno_rpc_address`       | The RPC address `bdjuno` will collect block data from            | `http://archive.testnet.com:26657` |
| `bdjuno_grpc_address`      | The gRPC address `bdjuno` will collect block data from           | `http://archive.testnet.com:9090`  |
| `bdjuno_fast_sync`         | Blocks close to genesis time will not be parsed if set to `true` | `false`                            |
| `bdui_chain`               | Specifies whether the chain is mainnet or testnet                | `testnet`                          |
| `bigdipper_genesis_time`   | The time of the chain's genesis in UTC, RFC3339 format           | `2022-01-12T00:52:40`              |
| `bigdipper_genesis_height` | The height of the chain at genesis                               | `9034670`                          |
| `bigdipper_use_tls_proxy`  | Enable TLS                                                       | `true`                             |
| `letsencrypt_email`        | A valid email address must be entered when TLS is enabled        |                                    |
| `hasura_admin_secret`      | A password to protect the Hasura service                         |                                    |
| `hasura_host`              | Subdomain for Hasura service                                     | `"hasura."`                        |
| `rpc_host`                 | Subdomain for RPC service                                        | `"rpc."`                           |
| `bdui_host`                | Subdomain for Big Dipper UI                                      | `"explorer."`                      |
| `bdui_icon`                | URL for the chain icon                                           |                                    |
| `bdui_logo`                | URL for the splash logo                                          |                                    |


## `hermes` role

| Variable                   | Description                           | Example Value |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------|
| `hermes_version`           | Hermes repo release                   | `v1.0.0`      |
| `hermes_relayer_keys`      | Set to `true` if using key files      | `true`        |
| `hermes_relayer_mnemonics` | Set to `true` if using mnemonic files | `false`       |
| `hermes_order`             | Channel ordering                      | `unordered`   |


## `consensus-monitor` role

| Variable                    | Description                                                    | Example Value                   |
|-----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| `consensus_monitor_version` | `cosmos-consensus-monitor` version to use                      | `v1.0.0`                        |
| `consensus_api_node_url`    | Node API endpoint                                              | `http://node.testnet.com:26657` |
| `consensus_rpc_node_url`    | Node RPC endpoint                                              | `http://node.testnet.com:1317`  |
| `consensus_ws_node_url`     | Port for the Websockets server                                 | `9002`                          |
| `consensus_ui_node_url`     | Port for the web UI server                                     | `8000`                          |
| `consensus_host`            | Subdomain to prefix the inventory hostname, requires DNS setup | `consensus.`                    |
